---
layout: post
title: "Perl is like Murakami"
---

# {{ page.title }}

Or maybe, Murakami is like Perl. Well, not exactly... Let's consider the following.

## What I know about Larry Wall

On top of my head, without looking on the intarweb, I know about Larry Wall
that he wrote **Perl** and **patch**, he is very religious, likes to wear
colourful shirts and big glasses, usually has a mustach, has some daughters and
a wife that is not afraid to follow him on stage at YAPC, and he was a linguist
before being a programer.

## What I know about Perl as a language

This last statement is the one I'm interested today: besides being a
programming language, Perl is a nearly a *language* by itself. It has some
structures that you can find in spoken and written languages, especially
english. Want an example ? `$_` is a generic pronoun, once you think about it
as **it**, it makes more sense. The distinction between `my` and `our` is
self-explanatory. Also, the fact that you can use the same keyword to build a
*prefix*, *infix* or *suffix* construction, or that you can use the same
expression as rvalue or lvalue.

## To the point

So few days ago, I was reading a book from *Haruki Murakami* in the tube while
going to $work. I can't read japanese, so I was reading a french-translated
version of *The Elephant Vanishes* (a collection of some of his short stories).
BTW I'm referring to [this author](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haruki_Murakami),
not [this one](http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ry%C5%AB_Murakami).

So I was reading one of the short stories from Murakami. I love his style, I
like his precises and minimlistic descriptions, thoughful stories, which often
have some kind of inevitable endings. Yet he achieves to give space and freedom
to the characters of the stories. They are actually most of the time lost and
puzzled, despite or because of the constraints.

Anyway, I was reading Murakami words, and I thought it was very similar to
reading Perl code. Sentences are usually short but very expressive, like the
Perl lines I tend to write. He maintains a few set of objects (characters),
that are properly instanciated and manipulated alongside the story. They
usually don't disappear silently, but something similar to `DESTROY` is applied
to them before the end.

His usage 
Things like closures are actually visible in Murakami's style, where some
statement is made at the start of the story, and is reevaluated at the end,
keeping its original context.

I'm probably crazy, but it struck me at once, and I couldn't stop seeing
similarities between the two syntax, the two languages. I thought Perl's syntax
was similar to english, but I have to say it's more similar to Murakami
japanese style, even seen through a translation prism :)



And while reading 

## Murakami ?



is similar to the way

I've been told that the linguistic background of
Larry is what 

